1. How does the book describe the difference between imperative and declarative languages?

	Declarative means you tell the computer WHAT you want it to get you and let the built in mathmatecal formulas provide the results. 
	Imperative means you tell the computer HOW you want it to get you something, then provide the inputs to generate an outcome.

2. List three categories of command statements in SQL.

	Data definition Language - DDL - Deals wth object definitions (Create, Alter, & Drop)
	Data Manipulation Language - DML - Deals with querying and modifying data (select, insert, update, delete, truncate, & Merge)
	Data Control Language - DCL - Deals with Permissions (Grant, Revoke)

3. Give an informal definition of database as used in the expression “relational database management system.” 

	In the RDBMS, a database is constricted by the definition of a set in set theory and the concept of predication,
	which means the database must involve a defined subjectively percieved collection of items
	that are predicated on some binary property which can be said to be true or false.
	
Give an informal definition of database as used in the expression “Human Resources database.”

	In Human Resources, a database comprises the defined values and properties associated with a subjectively percieved collection of human beings

4. The book states that, “[t]he goal of the relational model is to enable consistent representation of
data with minimal or no redundancy and without sacrificing completeness. . . ” Briefly state your
understanding of minimal or no redundancy and completeness. Why do you think that these values
are important?

	Representing data with little to no redundancy while maintaining completeness is about being as efficient as reasonably possible.
	Efficiency in database management is important in the preservation of finite computing power and storage and reduces complexity in representation.

5. What is the difference between two-valued logic, three-valued logic, and four-valued logic? How does
SQL implement three-valued predicate logic?

	two-valued logic allows for a binary value to be applied to an object or concept, true or false.
	Three valued logic allows for the value "unknown" to be applied to an object or concept.
	Four-valued logic allows the unknown value to manifest as applicable or non-applicable/irrelevant, giving four posible values.
	
	SQL implements three-value logic by assigning a special "null" marker to a predicate involving a missing or unknown value.

6. How does SQL enforce entity integrity? What is entity integrity?

	SQL uses the application of "constraints" defined in the data model (ie primary key) to enforce entity integrity through the RDBMS
	An entity has entity integrity when the primary key value of a row is unique and known/non-null (ie Scott Diddams does not appear twice)

7. How does SQL enforce referential integrity? What is referential integrity?

	SQL Enforces Referential integrity with "foreign keys" which may be primary keys from a different relation.
	A database has referential integrity when defined keys of reference do not differ between relations

8. What is a relation as defined in the textbook? A one word answer to this question is sufficient.

	A defined table - A set made of a heading (columns/Attributes) and body (rows/tuples)

9. Relational databases are based on three mathematical concepts: set theory, predicate logic, and relational algebra.
(a) Please give your brief understanding of set theory as described in the text. What is a set?

	A set is a collection of distinct, defined objects or concepts that we percieved to be related.

(b) Please give your brief understanding of predicate logic as described in the text. What is predicate
logic?

	Predicate logic applies to properties or concepts which can be said to be either true or false.

(c) Please give your brief understanding of relational algebra. What is selection? What is projection?
This is not in the book.

	Relational algebra is a process for modeling and communicating representative data based on defined sets of logical rules.
	Selection is the process of narrowing down the tuples, or rows of data to meet the desired outcome of a query.
	Projection is the process of narrowing down the headings/columns to meet the desired outcome of a query.

10. Is this table in first normal form? Why or why not? If it is not, how would you change it?

create table faculty (
	facID int primary key,
	facName text,
	facCreds text);
	
	This is not 1NF because the attributes are not all single-valued.
	IF facCreds is defined as, for example "highest education level achieved" or "qualified/not qualified" it will be 1NF.


11. Is this table in second normal form? Why or why not? If it is not, how would you change it?

create table pets (
	ownerID int primary key,
	petID int primary key,
	ownerFirstName text,
	ownerLastName text,
	petName text,
	petType text);
	
	This table is NOT 2NF because the primary key is a composite of two attributes which may not be unique
	a tuple may consist of one owner with two unique pets or two unique owners (married) with a single unique petID
	the primary key ought to be either the petID or ownerID, not both

12. Is this table in third normal form? Why or why not? If it is not, how would you change it?

create table friends (
	friendID int primary key,
	friendName text,
	friendStreet text,
	friendCity text,
	friendState text,
	friendZip text);
	
	This table is NOT 3NF as the latter 4 attributes have transitive dependencies - if the firend's city changes so will his street/zip etc...

13. List the components of a four-part object name.

	Instance.Database.Schema.Objects

14. What is the difference between declarative data integrity and procedural data integrity?

	Declarative data integrity is a result of the nature of the model itself, procudural is a result of additional commands or triggers


Reading Notes:

SQL - Structured Query Language - based on the relational model -T-SQL: "Transact"-SQL
	Severl categories of statements:
		Data definition Language - DDL - Deals wth object definitions (Create, Alter, & Drop)
		Data Manipulation Language - DML - Deals with querying and modifying data (select, insert, update, delete, truncate, & Merge)
		Data Control Language - DCL - Deals with Permissions (Grant, Revoke)
		
	Set Theory - mthematical branch from which the relational model is derrived
		"Set" === Any collection, M, into a whole of definite, distinct objects m (elements of M), which are of our perception or thought
			"perception" - means set definitions are subjective
			"object" can be abstract
			
	Predicate Logic - another branch from which relational model is derrived
		"predicate" ===a property or an expression they either holds or does not hold (true or false)
		
	The Relational Model - a semantic model for data management and manipulation based on set theory and predicate logic	
		purpose: enable consistent representation with minimal redundancy - max efficiency
	
	Relation - made of a heading a body
		Heading = set of attributes (Columns)
		Body = set of rows, where each element is identified by a key
		
	Type - Constrains an attribute to a certain set of possible or valid values
	
	Valued Logic
		Two-valued logic - true or false - follows law of excluded middle
		Three-value logic - true, false, or unknown
		Four-value logic - true, false, unknown but applicable, unknown but non-applicable
	
	Keys
		Primary - unique attribute used to identify a database uniquely
		Composite - primary key composed of multiple attributes that only together produce unique result
		Foreign - the primary key of another relation/table
		
		transitive functional dependency - changing one attribute will force another attribute to change as well 
			(ie Column sex (M/F) and column title (Ms./Mr.) have transitive dependency)
	
	1st Normal form 1NF
		Tuples/Rows are unique and attributes/columns are atomic (single-valued)
		
	2NF
		Data must meet the 1NF rules
		The primary key is represented by a single column - no composite keys
	
	3NF
		Meet 2NF
		have no transitive dependencies
		
	SQL Server Instance - an installation of SQL Server database engine or service
	
	Database
		A database is a container of objects (ie orders)
		Objects are organized/compartmentalized into Schemas (ie sales)
		a 2-part object name might include a schema and object (Sales.Orders)
		3-part name includes the database name
		4-part name includes the instance name
		
	Data integrity
		Declarative - data integrity enforced as part of the model
		Procedural - data integrity enforced with code like stored procedures or triggers